# Unnormalized Form

This page is a look at the worst possible way to organize data: the 0NF. It's common to see this used when developers never actually learned how to use structured databases. It's rare in a professional setting.

## Description

Unnormalized form (or UNF, or 0NF) is a simple database data model that is just outright poorly-designed, badly-optimized, and often full of redundant or unnecessary data. It's not good. You should avoid this as much as possible - and if you've studied structured databases (eg. SQL) or software development frameworks that connect to databases (eg. Ruby on Rails) then you likely already have this drilled out of your head anyway. 

It's common to see 0NF structures in things like JSON messages. If an API is sending a JSON object out to an application, that object needs to have all of its data contained within itself. If it doesn't, there's no guarantee that the application receiving the JSON message will be able to understand the information properly. This can cause 0NF entities to contain lots of nested data or nested objects, as well as high amounts of redundancy. You'll see this a lot in NoSQL systems as each document has no relation to anything else - so, 0NF is not relational! It's a poor fit for structured or SQL-based systems due to this.



## Rules

- Make each row in the 0NF table as self-sufficient as possible



## Advantages

- Useful for treating objects as rows of a database
- Can be simpler to query as the entity that you're querying usually only needs to look at its own fields, not at other rows of data in the table



## Disadvantages

- Common to see each row packed with redundant & repeated data
- CRUD operations can have lots of room for human error due to the amount of data often created in a single action
- Uses way more memory & storage space



## Example

Here's an example of a 0NF-level table:

| Hero ID | Name          | Alias                  | Franchise     | City       | Country | Age  | Birthday   | Superpower 1        | Superpower 2       | Superpower 3      |
| ------- | ------------- | ---------------------- | ------------- | ---------- | ------- | ---- | ---------- | ------------------- | ------------------ | ----------------- |
| 001     | Bruce Wayne   | Batman                 | DC Comics     | Gotham     | USA     | 30   | 17/04/1990 | Martial arts expert | Rich               | Master strategist |
| 002     | Laurel Lance  | Black Canary           | DC Comics     | Star City  | USA     | 24   | 15/11/1995 | Martial arts expert | Supersonic voice   | Acrobatics expert |
| 003     | Clark Kent    | Superman               | DC Comics     | Metropolis | USA     | 30   | 18/06/1990 | Super strength      | Heat vision        | Flight            |
| 004     | Dick Grayson  | Batman, Robin          | DC Comics     | Gotham     | USA     | 23   | 01/12/1996 | Martial arts expert |                    |                   |
| 005     | Tony Stark    | Iron Man               | Marvel Comics | Seattle    | USA     | 33   | 29/05/1987 | Super smart         | Rich               | Supersuit         |
| 006     | Steve Rogers  | Captain America, Nomad | Marvel Comics | New York   | USA     | 102  | 04/07/1918 | Martial arts expert | Master strategist  | Super strength    |
| 007     | James Howlett | Wolverine              | Marvel Comics | Alberta    | Canada  | 188  | 01/01/1832 | Super healing       | Augmented skeleton | Claws             |
| 008     | Peter Parker  | Spider-Man             | Marvel Comics | New York   | USA     | 19   | 10/08/2001 | Super strength      | Super smart        | Super climbing    |



And specifically why it's in 0NF: 

* So much duplicated data:
  * Some superheroes share aliases (Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson can both be Batman).
  * Superheroes fall into either the "DC Comics" franchise or the "Marvel Comics" franchise, so those values are duplicated a lot! 
  * Some cities are duplicated (eg. both Batmans are in Gotham, and both Captain America & Spider-Man are in New York).
  * Some countries are duplicated (eg. literally only Wolverine is from a country other than the USA in the table above).
  * Some superpowers are duplicated - these values might be in different columns, but the data is functionally the same.
* Table structured as an "all-in-one" table for a superhero. This is bad because:
  * If there's no clear purpose or reason for a table to be structured the way it is, then developers may use it in unintended ways. 
  * If all data is in one table, then all data must have the same level of access / authorization. If someone wants to find out ALL of the superpowers that exist in the world & takes a look at that example table, then they'll also discover the superhero secret identities & locations! That's really bad! 
  * Working with your database has decreased speed & increased costs. If you want to access the column values of a row (eg. find out what city Batman works in), this typically means loading the whole row into memory. If you're loading 20 columns of data per row, that's slower & more-costly than just loading 3 columns of data.
* Poor handling of collections:
  * Some superheroes have had multiple aliases (eg. Dick Grayson has been both Batman & Robin, Steve Rogers has been both Captain America & Nomad). Having arrays or lists or any collection of data in a single column automatically sets your database NF level down to 0NF. Collections don't work will in databases, because you should be using entity relationships to handle that type of thing! 
  * Some superheroes have 1 power. Some have 3 powers. There's no hard & set limit or rule on how many superpowers a hero must have - but this table has a cap of 3. This misrepresents the real entity (it's been seriously hard to try & distill some of those superhero powers into just 3 for this example!) so you may lose information. When dealing with real customers/users & real data, this can have massive negative legal & financial impacts. You'd be in a lot of trouble if you were keeping a record only the last 3 purchases when a user might have made hundreds of purchases over the life of your application! Again, this is where entity relationships will save you.

