# 3NF - Third Normal Form

This is a nice, happy level of database normalization that you should aim for in most of your work. If you need higher levels of normalization, then you're working with an extremely complex & delicate & large-scale system -- most people don't need to go higher than 3NF! 



## Description

3NF is just 2NF with one specific rule: you can't use ***transitive dependencies***. It might help to understand both parts of that term separately before jumping into the term itself:

* transitive: there is a relationship between the pieces of data used in context of this term, and that relationship is the same even if the data values are changed. For example: 1 is less than 5. 5 is less than 10. This transitive relationship here is "less than", and means that 1 is also less than 10.
* dependency: the value of data changes based on the value of another piece of data. For example, the seasons. The season you're currently in depends on the month in the calendar that you're currently in. The season depends on the month.

So, with those 2 separate definitions in mind: 

A transitive dependency is when Value A has a relationship with Value B, and that the value of Value A changes depending on the value of Value B. For 3NF in particular, it also means that you can calculate the value of Value A based on the value of Value B. In databases, if a value can be reliably calculated whenever you need it, then it shouldn't be stored in your database. This means Value A would not be stored in the database, but Value B would be stored in the database.



## Rules

- Meets all requirements of 2NF.
- Does not have any transitively-dependent values.



## Advantages

* Allows the database to take up less hard drive & memory space as fewer pieces of data are stored.
  * This has the flow-on effect of reducing your database cost, as it takes up less space & has fewer properties to process for things like database reads.



## Disadvantages

- Does increase the workload of the client application (eg. web app, software, game) as the calculation of data is pushed on to them. As long as you regularly test your project to confirm things work as expected from a user's point of view, you can prevent issues (eg. bad UX due to slow performance) caused by 3NF from reaching the user by finding other ways to optimize your user-facing application.



## Example

Here's a 2NF table that we'll convert into 3NF:

| Hero ID | Name        | Alias ID | Franchise ID | City ID | Powerset ID | Age  | Birthday   |
| ------- | ----------- | -------- | ------------ | ------- | ----------- | ---- | ---------- |
| 001     | Bruce Wayne | 001      | 001          | 001     | 001         | 30   | 17/04/1990 |



Since 3NF is all about removing ***transitive dependencies*** from tables, we have to identify which pieces of data rely on other pieces of data. From the short table above, the biggest transitive dependency is the one between Age and Birthday.

To figure out someone's age, you must know their birthday. If you only stored someone's age, could you figure out their birthday? Not very accurately - so birthday doesn't depend on age. But you could use their birthday to figure out their age - so the age depends on the birthday.

If you can calculate the value of a column using other columns in the same row, then you shouldn't store the calculated value in your database. So, the Age column can be removed from the database entirely!

| Hero ID | Name        | Alias ID | Franchise ID | City ID | Powerset ID | Birthday   |
| ------- | ----------- | -------- | ------------ | ------- | ----------- | ---------- |
| 001     | Bruce Wayne | 001      | 001          | 001     | 001         | 17/04/1990 |



Depending on your data, you could also further improve the table structure:

* The Franchise ID could almost be removed - most superheroes are unique to the franchise. Heroes with the same name across different franchises (eg. Captain Marvel) eventually have their name changed (DC turned their Captain Marvel into Shazam). If you know the Alias or superhero name, then you can use that to calculate which franchise they belong to, rather than storing the franchise directly in the hero table.

  


